---
Title: Telephones and Calculators
Published: 2010-11-14
Tag: musings
Author: Ben Carlsen
---
I’m often confused by the difference between the configuration of the numbers on calculators and telephones.  It’s fairly similar, with the three by three grid for numbers 1 through 9, and then the zero placed underneath.  The difference is that on calculators, the 1 is at the bottom left, and the numbers go up in value from left to right and up from there.  This is the same for keypads on computers.  On phones, however, the 1 is on the top left, and the numbers go up in value from left to right and down from there.

Why are they different?

According to [this handy telephone timeline](http://www.greatachievements.org/?id=3625), the first touch-tone telephone was introduced in 1963.  I can only assume that the number configuration for telephones has not changed since then.  According to [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calculator), as well as a few other places I looked, the first pocket calculators, came out in the 1970s.  It seems to me that the people developing the calculators could have at least talked to the people developing the touch-tone phones and said, “Hey, the numbers on our keypads are in a similar configuration, but they’re too different.  Why don’t we synchronize them?”

Why do I care?

Because it just gets frustrating when I make a lot of phone calls and then need to use a calculator.  I’ve just gotten used to the configuration of the numbers on the phone, and the calculator *looks* kind of similar, so I just start pressing where I remember the numbers being before.  That doesn’t work, and I mess up a lot.  It’s frustrating.

Look, I know it would be a problem to change the phone keypad configuration, because of the nicely placed pound and star buttons on either side of the 0.  Could we switch up the calculator/computer keypad, though?  It couldn’t happen without some people noticing, but I think it would work.  We have to get some more people on this.  More people have to care about this than just me, right?

Right?

I sure hope so.

UPDATE: I noticed that television remote controls also follow the telephone configuration method.  Also, 10-key keypads on computer keyboards follow the calculator method. The plot thickens…
